## Diabetes and Pharmaceutical Access Barriers in the United States

Diabetes mellitus, better known as simply diabetes, is a chronic disease wherein patients either cannot produce insulin (Type One) or have an unusual resistance to insulin (Type Two) and as a result cannot regulate their blood glucose levels. Until insulin was isolated and refined for medical use in the 1920s, it was usually managed via an imprecise regimen of intermittent fasting that was likely to result in hypoglycemic shock and potentially fatal comas. Although there is still not a cure, insulin injections and glucose monitoring can allow people with diabetes to manage the condition and live a long time without experiencing any of the most extreme complications (such as blindness, loss of sensation in the extremities, and muscle weakening). However, access to treatment can be extremely difficult for


## The Value of Oral Narratives in Historical Rhetoric

Stories like the one recounted by the Reyes sisters in the StoryCorps interview above are not uncommon in the USA, but there is a difference between seeing statistics and hearing individual accounts. Listening to first-hand experiences being recounted as above demonstrates the importance of re-examining the ways in which the issue of diabetes treatment, which seems like it should be long since solved, from a standpoint of policy and supports. This particular example is not valuable for the historical information and viewpoints it offers as much as for presenting the importance of that historical information and perhaps causing listeners to think about what could be done to change the present based on the combined presentation of contributing factors and personal stories relating to the effects of those factors.

Oral sources like this one may also be more effective because they can help to generate empathy for the experiences of people who would usually just be one of many (a little like private correspondence and diary sources, but with perhaps a stronger effect due to the attention that many people pay to things like tone of voice and speaking speed when deciding to express or act on sympathy), and in the case of discussing diabetes in particular, I think it would be a valuable asset in making a case to a larger audience that might generally not be predisposed to support dedicating more resources to measures that could help with diabetes management. Diabetes is often inaccurately presented as a problem entirely of diet and as an almost voluntary thing - a punishment of sorts for poor lifestyle choices. As a chronic illness that comes with no specific outward signs, it is easy for people - both privately and when engaging in public advocacy - to be unaware of how diabetes affects people who have it and their loved ones. Including firsthand accounts of situations that may occur could help to increase the effectiveness of historical research summaries aimed at the general public.

The audio is from StoryCorps [here](https://storycorps.org/stories/for-a-fathers-last-meal-the-main-ingredient-is-love/), and originally aired on NPR for <em>Morning Edition</em>.