# Annotated Salernitan Manuscript Translation Database – Pilot Project

## Application for the Hacking History Foundation's Student Development Grant

<!-- I like annotating translations, I like medieval medicine, and I like weird plants and weird calligraphy, so over-all this seems like great fun, if I can think of a way to make it sound like it's worth paying for.-->

### Introduction 

The texts associated with the School of Salerno had a great impact on the medicine of Western Europe in the middle ages. Books of pharmaceutical remedies like the <em>Circa instans</em> and the <em>Antidotarium Nicolaii</em> were particularly influential, as was the translation of <em>De gradibus</em> by Arabic philosopher Al-Kindi. The <em>Trotula</em> texts were also important for medieval gynecology. However, when manuscripts were copied, the illustrations could vary greatly, whether by adding in “Trotula” (a collective title for the texts written by Trota of Salerno) as an actual woman or by drawing plants in ways that only vaguely match any descriptions given.

This project proposes to study multiple manuscript copies of a set of a few texts (to be determined by the availability of multiple manuscript copies and whether permission can be granted to include them in the project; if possible, I would like to work on at least three different texts), adding annotations and a translation digitally and presenting them along with interactive maps. Through this process of digital annotation and presentation, this project will aim to evaluate the degree to which regional differences in flora influenced the interpretation and illustration of Salernitan pharmacy texts when they were re-copied to circulate elsewhere in Europe. It will also aim to digital repository of information on these texts of medieval medicine that can be freely accessed by interested individuals on the internet in order to present the texts along with their manuscript forms, as the format and appearance of a manuscript is something that is usually missed out (arguably by necessity, given the modern formatting conventions of books) in published translations.

### Methods 

The initial compilation phase of the project will involve contacting collections of scanned manuscripts to request permission for use of their scans, followed by transcribing the scanned images and coming up with a detailed gloss of the language (with notes of any potential ambiguity in words resulting from copying errors or damage) and then an annotated translation in the cases where there is not a freely available pre-existing translation to use. Additionally, I will contact collections that have manuscripts of texts within the project scope that have not been scanned to request permission to scan them at some point during the project timeframe in order to work on the project goal of comparing different copies of the same text as circulated around medieval Europe.

After deciding upon a body of texts to work on in this pilot project based on the availability of distinct manuscript copies, I will construct maps to be integrated into the page of each copy of each text using Leaflet and mapping APIs, with layers that show where the manuscript is from, the natural ranges of various plants fitting the descriptions of things used in the manuscript, and the text’s place of origin if possible. Once all the versions of the text that I intend to use in this project have been processed in that way and annotated as above, I will comment on the findings of this spatial inquiry, which may help to enhance a viewer's understanding of certain aspects of the illustrations in the manuscripts.

The results will be made publicly available via a GitHub Page with a purchased domain. Ideally, this will happen on a rolling basis, with each text’s entry being published after its integration into a page in the manner detailed above is complete, so that some part of the project will be available for viewing as early as the third to fourth month. After the project is completed, the results will remain published for at least one year while its success in meeting its goals is evaluated through the writing of a report.

### Timeline

For the first two months of the project, I will reach out to libraries and online repositories of manuscripts requesting permission to use their scanned images of manuscripts or to visit and scan manuscripts of theirs that are not online. (If I am granted permission for the latter, I will also begin to discuss a timeframe for when it would be possible to do that.) At the same time, I will work on increasing my familiarity with the affordances of the tools, and look for plant guides detailing common flora in various regions of Europe (or other sources of information on the same). Once I have received permission for some of the scans I intend to use, I will begin making a test page in the manner described above so that the end of the third month, there should be a completed page for at least one copy of one text.

(If travel is not feasible by the time of the project, part of the travel and accommodation portion of the budget can instead be used for sending portable scanners to collaborators with access to two archives that agree, and the rest of it – plus the unforeseen expenses portion – can go to paying those collaborators for their work. This may take longer to arrange, and so starting early on reaching out to collections is especially important.)

Going into the fourth month, I will either work on another copy of the same text, or on a copy of a different text (depending on permissions). The timeline will need to be somewhat flexible due to the uncertain timing of travel arrangements, but after the first copy of each text, some work will be able to be reused and thus it will likely go a little faster. By the end of the sixth month, ideally one text will have pages published on the site for all of the copies that are going to be used in this project, and one of the scanning excursions will have happened. The project should be complete or nearing completion early in month twelve. 

After the end of the twelve-month period, I will generate a report on the project’s success in meeting its goals (as outlined in introduction and elaborated upon in the section following this one), and may seek out other sources of funding based on the findings of that report with regards to the project’s effectiveness at answering the questions from the Introduction section.

### Importance

In a broader conversation about medieval medicine, examining the illustrations that go along with some descriptions of substances and finding the plants to which illustrators seem to think that they refer might shine new light on questions about medieval pharmacy and its roots in the learned medical traditions of the day. Given the emphasis on the appearance and other surface qualities of substances in the medical tradition passed down from Galen and Hippocrates, it may be that the regional availability of certain plants had little bearing on the efficacy of a treatment, or it may be that some things were known well enough to easily be found no matter how abstract the drawing was. Examining different manuscript copies of two or three influential sources together may help to explore the ways the perceptions of plants and substances described in those works varied geographically and over time, and the digital tools of mapping will allow viewers of the project to get a sense of both the widespread circulation of these manuscripts and why it matters that one was copied in Italy vs in France vs in Germany (for example).

### Budget

| Item                                         | Cost (CAD) | Reasoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| -------------------------------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Internet                                     | 240        | About $20/month to get increased bandwidth in order to work on the project efficiently and with consistent cloud backups. (I would continue paying for baseline internet independently of the grant, but the increased bandwidth would help to ensure efficiency and reduce downtime while working on the project.)                                                                    |
| External Hard Drive                          | 200        | Maintaining backups in case of unforeseen technical issues will be important. Having all of the project data backed up to an external drive will also mean that it can be transferred and shared more easily in case of future expansion into a larger team project.                                                                                                                   |
| Cloud Storage                                | 220        | See above; maintaining thorough back-ups is important.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Domain                                       | 250        | Ideally, the project would stay up on its domain once finished for some time past the end of the grant (to present it in its finished state), so this expense is intended to buy the domain for an additional year.                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Reference Text on Medieval Latin Orthography | 190        | I need one or two good and comprehensive volumes compiling the ways Medieval Latin diverges from Classical Latin (as the grammar is largely retained but the orthography and word usage changed sometimes quite significantly), the form of Latin with which I am vastly more comfortable.                                                                                             |
| Person-Hours                                 | 6900       | I estimate that I would use roughly an average of 30 hours per month on the project. In the summer, I would work an extra 100 hours or so. Under Ontario’s current minimum wage laws, it would have to be at least $14.25/hour; I've put it up to $15, adding up to a total of $5,400 for the baseline hours per month across the entire project, plus an extra $1,500 for the summer. |
| Travel                                       | 2800       | Estimated cost of two round-trip flights to cities in Europe (depending on where I can gain permission to go and scan some copies of manuscripts in two different collections).                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Accommodation                                | 800        | Accounting for potential inavailability of return flights the day after the completion of scanning, each trip might take up to four or five days.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Portable Scanner                             | 400        | In order to scan manuscripts. (If approval is given, I will first look into the chemistry of common ink and parchment types in order to ensure that nothing bad will happen to the manuscripts from being scanned.)                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Unforeseen Issues                            | 3000       | In case there are fees associated with any of the scanning, perhaps, or if the flights work out to more expensive than predicted due to their timing. This can be converted into a third trip if time (and a third library) permits.                                                                                                                                                   |

### Bibliography

[The Book of the Dead in 3D](3dcoffins.berkeley.edu), a project by the University of California at Berkeley in conjunction with several museums. Their annotations of texts on the mummies and presentation of context with maps are the sort of thing this project intends to do on scans of manuscript texts, and their format as a whole is similar to the intended format of this project.

[The Monastic Manuscript Project](http://www.earlymedievalmonasticism.org/), a database of descriptions of medieval manuscripts and their locations. This will be helpful in finding archives and libraries to contact.

[Manuscript Evidence for Pharmacy in the Early Middle Ages](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/writing-the-early-medieval-west/manuscript-evidence-for-pharmacy-in-the-early-middle-ages/418D226CD661CA14DE3236634441935A), a book chapter that deals with manuscripts about medieval pharmacy in western Europe.

[Herbal History Research Network](herbalhistory.org/home/), a digital project that presents articles on the history of herbal medicine at various time periods (and also holds seminars and other events). They have a resource list that includes some libraries and digitised archives of books relevant to the subject.

[The British Library's Medieval Manuscript Blog](https://blogs.bl.uk/digitisedmanuscripts/index.html), a series of commentaries on medieval manuscripts that have been digitised. Some of them deal with contextualizing works on medicine.